
		    
    
    To Theodore Watts-Dunton
    
    
    Dedicatory Epistle
    To my best and dearest friend I dedicate the first collected edition
     of my poems, and to him I address what I have to say on the occasion.
    
     You will agree with me that it is impossible for any man to undertake the task of
     commentary, however brief and succinct, on anything he has done or tried to do, without
     incurring the charge of egoism. But there are two kinds of egoism, the furtive and the frank:
     and the outspoken and open-hearted candour of Milton and
      Wordsworth, Corneille and Hugo,
     is not the least or the lightest of their claims to the regard as well as the respect or the
     reverence of their readers. Even if I were worthy to claim  with the lowest or with the highest of these deathless names, I would not seek to
     shelter myself under the shadow of its authority. The question would still remain open on all
     sides. Whether it is worth while for any man to offer any remarks or for any other man to read
     his remarks on his own work, his own ambition, or his own attempts, he cannot of course
     determine. If there are great  examples of abstinence
     from such a doubtful , there are likewise great examples to the contrary. As long as the writer can succeed
     in evading the kindred charges and cognate risks of vanity and humility, there can be no reason
     why he should not undertake it. And when he has nothing to regret and nothing to recant, when
     he finds nothing that he could wish to cancel, to alter, or to unsay, in any page he has ever
     laid before his reader, he need not be seriously troubled by the inevitable consciousness that
     the work of his early youth is not and cannot be unnaturally unlike the work of a very young
     man. This would be no excuse for it, if it were in any sense bad work: if it be so, no apology
     would avail; and I certainly have none to offer. 
     It is now thirty-six years since my first volume of miscellaneous verse, lyrical and
     dramatic and elegiac and generally heterogeneous, had as quaint a reception and as singular a
     fortune as I have ever heard or read of. I do not think you will differ from my opinion that
     what is best in it cannot be divided from what is not so good by any other line of division
     than that which makes off mature from immature execution—in other words, complete
     from incomplete conception. For its author the most amusing and satisfying result of the
     clatter aroused by it was the deep diversion of collating and comparing the variously
     inaccurate verdicts of the scornful or mournful censors who insisted on regarding all the
     studies of passion or sensation attempted or achieved 
     in it as either confessions of positive fact or  of absolute fancy. There are photographs from life in the book; and there are
     sketches from imagination. Some which keen-sighted criticism has dismissed with a smile as
     ideal or imaginary were as real and actual as they well could be: others which have been taken
     for obvious transcripts from memory were utterly fantastic or dramatic. If the two kinds cannot
     be distinguished, it is surely rather a credit than a discredit to an artist whose medium or
     material has more in common with a musician’s than with a sculptor’s. Friendly and kindly
     critics, English and foreign, have detected ignorance of the subject in poems taken straight
     from the life, and have protested that they could not believe me were I to swear that poems
     entirely or mainly fanciful were not faithful expressions or transcriptions of the writer’s
     actual experience and personal emotion. But I need not remind you that all I do to say about
     this book was said once for all in the year of its publication: I have nothing to add to my
     notes then taken, and I have nothing to retract from them. To parade or to disclaim experience
     of passion or of sorrow, of pleasure or pain, is the habit and the sign of a school which has
     never found a disciple among the better sort of English poets, and which I know to be no less
     pitifully contemptible in your opinion than in mine. 

     In my next work it should be superfluous to say that there is no touch of dramatic
     impersonation or  imaginary emotion. The writer of
      Songs before Sunrise, from the first line to the last, wrote
        simply in submissive obedience to Sir Philip Sidney’s precept —
      Look in thine heart, and write. The dedication of these poems, and the fact
     that dedication was accepted, must be sufficient evidence of this. They do not pretend and they
     were never intended to be merely the metrical echoes, or translations into lyric verse, of
     another man’s doctrine. Mazzini was no more a Pope or a
      Dictator than I was a parasite or a papist. Dictation and inspiration are rather
     different things. These poems, and others which followed or preceded them in print, were
     inspired by such faith as is born of devotion and reverence; not by such faith, if faith it may
     be called, as is synonymous with servility or compatible with prostration of an abject or
     wavering spirit and a submissive or dethroned intelligence. You know that I never pretended to
     see eye to eye with my illustrious friends and masters, Victor Hugo and
      Giuseppe Mazzini, in regard to the positive and passionate confidence of
     their sublime and purified theology. Our betters ought to know better than we: they would be
     the last to wish that we should pretend to their knowledge, or assume a certitude which is
     theirs and is not ours. But on one point we surely cannot but be at one with them: that the
     spirit and the letter of all other than savage and barbarous religions are irreconcilably at
     variance, and that prayer or homage addressed to an image of our own or of other men’s making,
     be that image  avowedly material or conventionally
     spiritual, is the affirmation of idolatry with all its attendant atrocities, and the negation
     of all belief, all reverence, and all love, due to the noblest object of human worship that
     humanity can realise or conceive. Thus much the exercise of our common reason might naturally
     suffice to show us: but when its evidence is confirmed and fortified by the irrefragable and
     invariable  of history, there is no room for further dispute or fuller argument on a subject now
     visibly beyond reach and eternally beyond need of debate or . I know not whether it may or may not be worth while to add that every passing word I
     have since thought fit to utter on any national or political question has been as wholly
     consistent with the  which I then did my best to proclaim and defend as my apostasy from the faith of all
     republicans in the fundamental and final principle of union, voluntary if possible and
     compulsory if not, would have been ludicrous in the imprudence of its inconsistency with those
     simple and irreversible principles. Monarchists and anarchists may be advocates of national
       and reactionary division; republicans cannot be. The first and last article of their
     creed is unity: the most grinding and crushing tyranny of a convention, a directory, or a despot,
     is less incompatible with republican faith than the fissiparous democracy of disunionists or
     communalists. 

     If the fortunes of my lyrical work were amusingly eccentric and accidental, the varieties of
     opinion  which have saluted the appearance of my plays
     have been, or have seemed to my humility, even more diverting and curious. I have been told by
     reviewers of note and position that a single one of them is worth all my lyric and otherwise
       achievements or attempts: and I have been told on equal or similar authority that,
     whatever I may be in any other field, as a dramatist I am demonstrably nothing. My first if not
     my strongest ambition was to do something worth doing, and not utterly unworthy of a young
     countryman of Marlowe the teacher and Webster the
     pupil of Shakespeare, in the line of work which those three poets had left
     as a possibly attainable example for ambitious Englishmen. And my first book, written while yet
     under academic or tutorial authority, bore evidence of that ambition in every line. I should be
     the last to deny that it also bore evidence of the fact that its writer had no more notion of
     dramatic or theatrical construction than the authors of Tamburlaine the
      Great , King Henry VI., and Sir
      Thomas Wyatt. Not much more, you may possibly say, was  in Chastelard : a play also conceived and partly
     written by a youngster not yet emancipated from servitude to college rule. I fear that in the
     former volume there had been little if any promise of power to grapple with the realities and
     subtleties of character and motive: that whatever may be in it of promise or of merit must be
     sought in the language and the style of such better passages as  may perhaps be found in single and separable speeches of
        Catherine and Rosamond. But in Chastelard there are two figures and a sketch in which I
     certainly seem to see something of real and evident life. The sketch of
      Darnley was afterwards filled out and finished in the subsequent tragedy
     of Bothwell. That ambitious, conscientious, and  piece of work is of course less properly definable as a tragedy than by the old
     Shakespearen term of a chronicle history. The radical difference between tragic history and
     tragedy of either the classic or the romantic order, and consequently between the laws which
     govern the one and the principles which guide the other, you have yourself made clear and
     familiar to all capable students. The play of mine was not, I think, inaccurately defined as an
     epic drama in the French verses of dedication which were acknowledged by the greatest of all
     French poets in a letter from which I dare only quote one line of Olympian judgment and godlike
     generosity. ‘Occuper ces deux cimes, cela n’est donné
      qu’à vous.’ Nor will I refrain from the confession that I cannot think it an
     epic or a play in which any one part is sacrificed to any other, any subordinate figure
     mishandled or neglected or  or effaced for the sake of the predominant and central person. And, though this has
     nothing or less than nothing to do with any question of poetic merit or demerit, of dramatic
     success or unsuccess, I will add that I took as much care and  pains as though I had been writing or compiling a history of the
     period to do loyal justice to all the historic figures which came within the scope of my
     dramatic or poetic design. There is not one which I have designedly altered or intentionally
     modified: it is of course for others to decide whether there is one which is not the living
     likeness of an actual or imaginable man. 

     The third part of this trilogy , as far as I know or remember, found favour only with the
     only man in England who could speak on the subject of historic drama
     with the authority of an expert and a master. The generally ungracious reception of Mary Stuart gave me neither surprise nor disappointment: the
     cordial approbation or rather the generous applause of Sir Henry Taylor
     gave me all and more than all the satisfaction I could ever have looked for in recompense of as
     much painstaking and  though interesting and enjoyable work as can ever, I should imagine, have been
     devoted to the completion of any comparable design. Private and personal appreciation I have
     always thought and often found more valuable and delightful than all possible or imaginable clamour
     of public praise. This preference will perhaps be supposed to influence my opinion if I avow
     that I think I have never written anything worthier of such reward than the closing tragedy
     which may or may not have deserved but which certainly received it. 

     My first attempt to do something original in 
     English which might in some degree reproduce for English readers the likeness of a Greek
     tragedy, with possibly something more of its true poetic life and charm than could have
     expected from the authors of Caractacus and Merope, was perhaps too exuberant and effusive in its dialogue, as
     it certainly was too irregular in the occasional license of its choral verse, to accomplish the
     design or achieve the success which its author should have aimed at. It may or may not be too
     long as a poem: it is, I fear, too long for a poem of the kind to which it belongs or aims at
     belonging. Poetical and mathematical truth are so different that I doubt, however unwilling I
     may naturally be to doubt, whether it can truthfully be said of Atalanta in Calydon that the whole is greater than any part of it. I hope it may be,
     and I can honestly say no more. Of Erechtheus I venture to
     believe with somewhat more confidence that it can. Either poem, by the natural necessity of its
     kind and structure, has its crowning passage or passages which cannot,  much they may lose by detachment from their context, lose as much as the crowning
     scene or scenes of an English or Shakespearen play, as opposed to an
     Æschylean or Sophoclean tragedy, must lose and ought to lose by a
     similar separation. The two best things in these two Greek plays, the
     antiphonal lamentation for the dying Meleager and the choral presentation
     of stormy battle between the forces of land and sea, lose less by such division  from the main body of the poem than would those scenes in Bothwell which deal with the turning-point in the life of
     Mary Stuart on the central and conclusive day of Carberry
      Hill. 

     It might be thought pedantic or pretentious in a modern poet to divide his poems after the
     old Roman fashion into sections and classes: I must confess that I should like to see this
     method applied, were it but by way of experiment in a single edition, to the work of the
     leading poets of our own country and century: to see, for instance, their lyrical and elegiac
     works arranged and registerd apart, each kind in a class of its own, such as is usually
     reserved, I know not why, for sonnets only. The apparent formality of such an arrangement as
     would give us, for instance, the odes of Coleridge and
      Shelley collected into a distinct reservation or division might possibly
     be more than compensated to the more capable among students by the gain in ethical or spiritual
     symmetry and aesthetic or intellectual harmony. The ode or hymn—I need remind no probable reader that the terms are synonymous in the
     speech of Pindar— asserts its primacy or pre-eminence over other
     forms of poetry in the very name which defines or proclaims it as essentially the song; as
     something above all less pure and absolute kinds of song by the very nature and law of its
     being. The Greek form, with its regular arrangement of turn, return, and aftersong, is not to
     be imitated because it is Greek, but to be adopted because it is best: the very best, as a
     rule,  that could be imagined for lyrical expression of
     the thing conceived or lyrical aspiration towards the aim imagined. The rhythmic reason of its
     rigid but not arbitrary law lies simply and solely in the charm of its regular variations. This
     can be given in English as clearly and fully, if not so sweetly and subtly, as in Greek; and
     should, therefore, be expected and required in an English poem of the same nature and
     proportion. The Sapphic or Alcaic, a simple sequence of identical
     stanzas, could be imitated or revived in Latin by translators or disciples: the scheme of it is
     exquisitively adequate and sufficient for comparatively short flights of passion or emotion,
     ardent or contemplative and personal or patriotic; but what can be done in English could not be
     attempted in Latin. It seems strange to me, our language being what it is, that our literature
     should be no richer than it is in examples of the higher or at least the more capacious and
     ambitious kind of ode. Not that the full Pindaric form of threefold or triune structure need be
     or should be always adopted: but without an accurately corresponsive or antiphonal scheme of
     music even the master of masters, who is Coleridge, could not produce,
     even through the superb and enchanting melodies of such a poem as his Dejection, a fit and complete companion, a full and perfect rival, to such a poem as
     his ode on France. 

     The title of ode may more properly and fairly be so extended as to cover all lyrical poems in
     stanzas or couplets than so strained as to include a lawless  lyric of such irregular and uneven build as
      Coleridge only and hardly could make acceptable or admissible among more
     natural and lawful forms of poetry. Law, not lawlessness, is the natural condition of poetic
     life; but the law must itself be poetic and not pedantic, natural and not conventional. It
     would be a trivial precision or restriction which would refuse the title of ode to the stanzas
     of Milton or the  of Aristophanes ; that glorious form of lyric verse which a
     critic of our own day, as you may not impossibly remember, has likened with such  felicity of comparison to the gallop of the horses of the sun. Nor, I presume, should
     this title be denied to a poem written in the more modest metre—more modest as being
     shorter by a foot— which was chosen for those twin poems of antiphonal correspondence
     in subject and in sound, the Hymn to Proserpine and the Hymn of Man: the death-song of spiritual decadence and the birthsong
     of spiritual renascence. Perhaps, too, my first stanzas addressed to Victor
      Hugo may be ranked as no less of an ode than that on the insurrection in
      Candia: a poem which attracted, whether or not it may have deserved,
     the notice and commendation of Mazzini: from whom I received, on the
     occasion of its , a letter which was the beginning of my personal intercourse with the man whom I had
     always revered above all other men on earth. But for this happy accident I might not feel
     disposed to set much store by my first attempt at a regular ode of orthodox or  legitimate construction: I doubt whether it quite succeeded in
     evading the criminal risk and the capital offence of formality: at least until the change of
     note in the closing epode gave fuller scope and freer play of wing to the musical expression.
     But in my later ode on Athens, absolutely faithful as it is in form to the strictest type and
     the most stringent law of Pindaric hymnology, I venture to believe that there is no more sign
     of this infirmity than is in the less classically regulated poem on the Armada; which, though
     built on a new scheme, is nevertheless in its way, I think, a legitimate ode, by right of its
       in general arrangement of corresponsive . By the test of these two poems I am content that my claims should be decided and my
     station determined as a lyric poet in the higher sense of the term; a craftsman in the most
     ambitious line of his art that ever aroused or ever can arouse the emulous aspiration of his
     kind. 

     Even had I ever felt the same impulse to attempt and the same ambition to achieve the
     enterprise of epic or narrative that I had always felt with regard to lyric or dramatic work, I
     could never have  to myself the lowly and unambitious aim of competition with the work of so notable a
       workman in the humbler branch of that line as William Morris. No
        conception could have been further from my mind when I undertook to rehandle the deathless
     legend of Tristram than that of so modest and preposterous a trial of
     rivalry. My aim  was simply to present that story,
     not diluted and debased as it had been in our own time by other hands, but undefaced by
     improvement and  by transformation, as it was known to the age of Dante whenever
        the chronicles of romance found hearing, from Ercildoune to
      Florence: and not in the epic or romantic form of sustained or  narrative, but mainly through a succession of dramatic scenes or pictures with
     descriptive  or backgrounds: the scenes being of the  construction, duologue or monologue, without so much as the classically permissible
     intervention of a third or fourth person. It is only in our native northern form of narrative
     poetry, on the old and unrivalled model of the English ballad, that I can claim to have done
     any work of the kind worth : unless the story of Balen should be considered as something other than
        a series or sequence of ballads. A more plausible objection was brought to bear against Tristram of Lyonesse than that of failure in an enterprise which I
     never thought of undertaking: the objection of an irreconcilable  between the incidents of the old legend and the meditations on man and nature, life
     and death, chance and destiny, assigned to a typical hero of chivalrous romance. And this
     objection might be unanswerable if the slightest attempt had been made to treat the legend as
     in any possible sense historical or capable of either rational or ideal association with
     history, such as would assimilate the name and fame  of
      Arthur to the name and fame of any actual and indisputable
      Alfred or Albert of the future. But the age when
     these romances actually lived and flourished side by side with the reviving legends of
      Thebes and Troy, not in the crude and bloodless forms of Celtic and
        archaic fancy but in the ampler and manlier developments of Teutonic and mediæval
     imagination, was the age of Dante and Chaucer: an age
     in which men were only too prone to waste their time on the twin sciences of astrology and
     theology, to expand their energies in the jungle of pseudosophy or the morass of metaphysics.
     There is surely nothing more  or anachronic in the soliloquy of Tristram after his separation
     from Iseult than in the lecture of Theseus after the
     obsequies of Arcite. Both heroes belong to the same impossible age of an
     imaginary world: and each has an equal right, should it so please his chronicler, to reason in
     the pauses of action and philosophise in the intervals of . After all, the active men of the actual age of chivalry were not all of them mere
     muscular machines for martial or pacific exercise of their physical functions or abilities. 

     You would agree, if the point were worth , that it might savour somewhat of pretension, if not of affectation, to be over
     particular in  of poems according to subject than form, spirit rather than method, or
     motive rather than : an yet there might be some excuse for the fancy or the pedantry of such a
     classification as  should set apart, for example, poems
     inspired by the influence of places, whether seen but once or familiar for years or associated
     with the earliest memories within cognisance or record of the mind, and poems inspired by the
     emotions of regard or regret for the living or the dead; above all, by the rare and profound
     passion of reverence and love and faith which labours and rejoices to find utterance in some
     tributary sacrifice of song. Mere descriptive poetry of the prepense and formal kind is
     exceptionally if not proverbially liable to incur and to deserve the charge of dullness: it is
     unnecessary to emphasise or obtrude the personal note, the presence or the emotion of a
     spectator, but it is necessary to make it felt and keep it perceptible if the poem is to have
     life in it or even right to live: felt as in Wordsworth’s work it is
     always, perceptible as it is always in Shelley’s. This note is more plain
     and positive than usual in the poem which attempts—at once a simple and so ambitious
     attempt—to render the contrast and the concord of night and day on Loch
      Torridon: it is, I think, duly sensible though implicitly subdued in four poems
     of the West Undercliff, born or  of sunset in the bay and moonlight on the cliffs, noon or morning in a living and
     shining garden, afternoon or twilight on one left flowerless and forsaken. Not to you or any
     other poet, nor indeed to the very humblest and simplest lover of poetry, will it seem
     incongruous or strange, suggestive of imperfect sympathy with life or deficient  from nature, that the very words of Sappho should be heard and
     recognised in the notes of the nightingales, the glory of the presence of dead poets imagined
     in the presence of the glory of the sky, the lustre of their advent and their passage felt
     visible as in vision on the live and limpid floorwork of the  and sunset-coloured sea. The half-brained  to whom books are other than living things may see with the eyes of a bat and draw
     with the fingers of a mole his dullard’s distinction between books and life: those who live the
     fuller life of a higher animal than he know that books are to poets as much part of that life as
     pictures are to painters or as music is to musicians, dead matter though they may be to the
     spiritually still-born children of dirt and dullness who find it possible and natural to live
     while dead in heart and brain. Marlowe and
      Shakespeare, 
      Æschylus
      
      and Sappho, do not for us live only on the dusty shelves of
     libraries. 

     It is hardly probable that especial and familiar love of places should give any special
     value to verses written under the influence of their charm: no intimacy of years and no
     association with the past gave any colour of emotion to many other studies of English land and
     sea which certainly are no less faithful and possibly have no less spiritual or poetic life in
     them than the four to which I have just referred, whose localities lie all within the boundary
     of a mile or so. No contrast could be stronger than that between the majestic and exquisite
     glory of cliff  and crag, lawn and woodland, garden
     and lea, to which I have done homage though assuredly I have not done justice in these four
     poems—In the Bay,
        On the Cliffs,
        A Forsaken Garden, the  of The Sisters—and the dreary beauty,
       if not unearthly in its desolation, of the  creeks and inlets, lined and paven with sea-flowers, which make of the salt marshes a
     fit and funereal setting, a fatal and appropriate foreground, for the supreme desolation of the
     relics of Dunwich; the beautiful and awful solitude of a wilderness on
     which the sea has forbidden man to build or live, overtopped and bounded by the tragic and
     ghastly solitude of a headland on which the sea has forbidden the works of human charity and
     piety to survive; between the dense and sand-encumbered tides which are eating the desecrated
     wreck and ruin of them all away, and the matchless magic, the ineffable  of the sea whose beauties and delights, whose translucent depths of water and
     divers-coloured banks of submarine foliage and flowerage, but faintly reflected in the stanzas
     of the little ode of Off Shore, complete the charm of the
     scenes as faintly sketched or shadowed forth in the poems just named, or the sterner and
     stranger magic of the seaboard to which tribute was paid in An Autumn
         Vision, A Swimmer’s Dream, On
             the South Coast, Neap-tide: or, again, between the sterile stretches and sad limitless outlook of the shore
     which faces a hitherto undetermined and interminable sea, and the  joyful and fateful beauty of the seas of
      Bamborough and the seas about Sark and
      Guernsey. But if there is enough of the human or personal note to
     bring into touch the various poems which deal with these various impressions, there may perhaps
     be no less of it discernible in such as try to render the effect of inland or woodland
     solitude—the splendid oppression of nature at noon which found utterance of old in
     words of such singular and everlasting significance as panic and nympholepsy. 

     The retrospect across many years over the many eulogistic and elegiac poems which I have
     inscribed or devoted to the commemorations or the panegyric of the living or the dead has this
     in it of pride and pleasure, that I find little to recant and nothing to repent on
     reconsideration of them all. If ever a word of tributary thanksgiving for the delight and the
     benefit of loyal admiration evoked in the spirit of a boy or aroused in the intelligence of
     a man may seem to exceed the limit of demonstrable accuracy, I have no apology to offer for any
     such aberration from the safe path of tepid praise or conventional applause. I can truly say
     with Shelley that I have been fortunate in friendships: I might add if I
     cared, as he if he had cared might have added, that I have been no less fortunate in my enemies
     than in my friends; and this, though by comparison a matter of ineffable insignificance, can
     hardly be to any rational and right-minded man a matter of positive indifference. Rather should
     it be always a subject  for thankfulness and
     self-congratulations if a man can honestly and reasonably feel assured that his friends and
     foes alike have been always and at almost all points the very men he would have chosen, had
     choice and foresight been allowed him, at the very outset of his career in life. I should
     never, when a boy, have dared to dream that as a man I might possibly be admitted to the
     personal acquaintance of the three living gods, I do not say of my idolatry, for idolatry is a
     term inapplicable where the gods are real and true, but of my whole-souled and
     single-hearted worship: and yet, when writing of Landor, of
      Mazzini, and of Hugo, I write of men who have
     honoured me with the assurance and the evidence of their cordial and affectionate regard.
     However inadequate and unworthy may be my tribute to their glory when living and their memory
     when dead, it is that of one whose gratitude and devotion found unforgettable favour in their sight.
     And I must be allowed to add that the redeeming quality of entire and absolute sincerity may be
     claimed on behalf of every line I have written in honour of friends, acquaintances, or
     strangers. My tribute to Richard Burton was not more genuine in its
     expression than my tribute to Christina Rossetti. Two noble human
     creatures more utterly unlike each other it would be  impossible to conceive; but it was as simply natural for one who honoured them both
     to do honest homage, before and after they had left us, to  the saintly and secluded poetess as to the adventurous and
     unsaintly hero. Wherever anything is worthy of honour and thanksgiving it is or it always
     should be as natural if not as delightful to give thanks and do honour to a stranger as to a
     friend, to a  long since dead as to a benefactor still alive. To the kindred spirits of
      Philip Sidney and Aurelio Saffi it was almost as
        equal a pleasure to offer what tribute I could bring as if Sidney also
     could have honoured me with his personal friendship. To Tennyson and
      Browning it was no less fit that I should give honour than that I should
     do homage to the memory of Bruno, the martyred friend of
        Sidney. And I can hardly remember any task that I ever took more delight
     in discharging than I felt in the inadequate and partial payment of a lifelong debt to the
     marvellous and matchless succession of poets who made the glory of our country  for ever by the work they did between the joyful date of the rout of the
      Armada and the woful date of the outbreak of civil war. 

    
     Charles Lamb, as I need not remind you, wrote for antiquity: nor need you
     be assured that when I write plays it is with a view to their being acted at the
      Globe, the Red Bull, or the Black
      Friars. And whatever may be the dramatic or other defects of Marino Faliero or Locrine, they do
     certainly bear the same relation to previous plays or attempts at plays on the same subjects as
        King Henry V. to The Famous
      Victories —if not as King Lear,
      a poem beyond comparison with all other works of man
        except possibly Prometheus and Othello, to the primitive and infantile scrawl or drivel of King Leir and his three daughters. The fifth act of Marino
      Faliero, hopelessly impossible as it is from the point of view of modern stagecraft,
     could hardly have been found too untheatrical, too utterly given over to talk without action,
     by the  which endured and applauded the magnificent monotony of Chapman’s
     eloquence—the fervent and inexhaustible declamation which was offered and accepted
     as a substitute for study of character and interest of action when his two finest plays, if
     plays they can be called, found favour with an incredibly intelligent and an inconceivably
     tolerant audience. The metrical or executive experiment attempted and carried through in Locrine would have been improper to any but a purely and wholly
     romantic play or poem: I do not think that the life of human character or lifelikeness of
     dramatic dialogue has suffered from the bondage of rhyme or has been sacrificed to the exigence
     of metre. The tragedy of The Sisters, however defective it may
     be in theatrical interest or progressive action, is the only modern  play I know in which realism in the reproduction of natural dialogue and accuracy in
     the representation of natural intercourse between men and women of gentle birth and breeding
     have been found or made compatible with expression in genuine if simple blank verse. It is not
     for me to decide whether  anything in the figures
     which play their parts on my imaginary through realistic stage may be worthy of sympathy,
     attention, or interest: but I think they talk and act as they would have done in life  ever lapsing into platitude or breaking out of nature. 

     In Rosamund, Queen of the Lombards, I took up a subject long
     since mishandled by an English dramatist of all but the highest rank, and one which in later
     days Alfieri had commemorated in a  passage of a wholly unhistoric and somewhat unsatisfactory play. The comparatively
     slight  from historic records in the final catastrophe or consummation of mine is not, I
     think, to say the least, injurious to the tragic effect or the moral interest of the story. 

     A writer conscious of any natural command over the musical resources of his language can
     hardly fail to take such pleasure in the enjoyment of this gift or instinct as the greatest
     writer and the greatest versifier of our age must have felt at its highest possible degree when
     composing a musical exercise of such incomparable scope and fullness as Les Djinns. But if he be a poet after the order of Hugo or
      Coleridge or Shelley, the result will be something
     very much more than a musical exercise; though indeed, except to such ears as should always be
     kept closed against poetry, there is no music in verse which has not in it sufficient fullness
     and ripeness of meaning, sufficient adequacy of emotion or of  thought, to abide the analysis of any other than the purblind
     scrutiny of prepossession or the squint-eyed inspection of malignity. There may perhaps be
     somewhat more depth and variety of feeling or  condensed into the narrow frame of the poems which compose A
      Century of Roundels than would be needed to fulfil the epic vacuity of a
        Chœrilus or Coluthus. And the form chosen
     for my only narrative poem was chosen as a test of the truth of my conviction that such work
     could be done better on the straitest and the strictest principles of verse than on the looser
     and more slippery lines of mediæval or modern . The impulsive and irregular verse which had been held sufficient for the stanza
     selected or accepted by Thornton and by Tennyson
     seemed capable of improvement and invigoration as a vehicle or a medium for poetic narrative.
     And I think it has not been found unfit to give something of dignity as well as facility to a
     narrative which recasts in modern English verse one of the noblest and loveliest old English
     legends. There is no episode in the cycle of Arthurian romance more genuinely
      Homeric in its sublime simplicity and its pathetic sublimity of submission to the
        masterdom of fate than that which I have rather reproduced than recast in The Tale of Balen : and impossible as it is to render the text or
     express the spirit of the Iliad in English prose or rhyme—above all, in
     English blank verse—it is possible, in such a metre  as was chosen and refashioned for this poem, to give some sense
     of the rage and rapture of battle for which Homer himself could only find
     fit and full expression by similitudes drawn like mine from the revels and the terrors and the
     glories of the sea. 

    It is nothing to me that what I write should find immediate or general acceptance: it is much to
     know that on the whole it has won for me the right to address this dedication and inscribe this
     edition to you.

    
     Algernon Charles Swinburne
    
			    
   