
					    
				            
        
            
            A Year's Carols
            
                January
                Hail, January, that bearest here
                On snowbright breasts the babe-faced year
                That weeps and trembles to be born.
                Hail, maid and mother, strong and bright,
                Hooded and cloaked and shod with white,
                Whose eyes are stars that match the morn.
                Thy forehead braves the storm's bent bow,
                Thy feet enkindle stars of snow.
            
            
                February
                Wan February with weeping cheer,
                Whose cold hand guides the youngling year
                Down misty roads of mire and rime,
                Before thy pale and fitful face
                The shrill wind shifts the clouds apace
                Through skies the morning scarce may climb.
                Thine eyes are thick with heavy tears,
                But lit with hopes that light the year's
            
            
            
                March
                Hail, happy March, whose foot on earth
                Rings as the blast of martial mirth
                When trumpets fire men's hearts for fray.
                No race of wild things winged or finned
                May match the might that wings thy wind
                Through air and sea, through scud and spray.
                Strong joy and thou were powers twin-born
                Of tempest and the towering morn.
            
            
                April
                Crowned April, king whose kiss bade earth
                Bring forth to time her lordliest birth
                When Shakespeare from thy lips drew breath
                And laughed to hold in one soft hand
                A spell that bade the world's wheel stand,
                And power on life, and power on death,
                With quiring suns and sunbright showers
                Praise him, the flower of all thy flowers.
            
            
                May
                Hail, May, whose bark puts forth full-sailed
                For summer; May, whom Chaucer hailed
                With all his happy might of heart,
                And gave thy rosebright daisy-tips
                Strange fragrance from his amorous lips
                That still thine own breath seems to part
                And sweeten till each word they say
                Is even a flower of flowering May.
            
            
            
                June
                Strong June, superb, serene, elate
                With conscience of thy sovereign state
                Untouched of thunder, though the storm
                Scathe here and there thy shuddering skies
                And bid its lightning cross thine eyes
                With fire, thy golden hours inform
                Earth and the souls of men with life
                That brings forth peace from shining strife.
            
            
                July
                Hail, proud July, whose fervent mouth
                Bids even be morn and north be south
                By grace and gospel of thy word,
                Whence all the splendour of the sea
                Lies breathless with delight in thee
                And marvel at the music heard
                From the ardent silent lips of noon
                And midnight's rapturous plenilune.
            
            
                August
                Great August, lord of golden lands,
                Whose lordly joy through seas and strands
                And all the red-ripe heart of earth
                Strikes passion deep as life, and stills
                The folded vales and folding hills
                With gladness too divine for mirth,
                The gracious glories of thine eyes
                Make night a noon where darkness dies.
            
            
            
                September
                Hail, kind September, friend whose grace
                Renews the bland year's bounteous face
                With largess given of corn and wine
                Through many a land that laughs with love
                Of thee and all the heaven above,
                More fruitful found than all save thine
                Whose skies fulfil with strenuous cheer
                The fervent fields that knew thee near.
            
            
                October
                October of the tawny crown,
                Whose heavy-laden hands drop down
                Blessing, the bounties of thy breath
                And mildness of thy mellowing might
                Fill earth and heaven with love and light
                Too sweet for fear to dream of death
                Or memory, while thy joy lives yet,
                To know what joy would fain forget.
            
            
                November
                Hail, soft November, though thy pale
                Sad smile rebuke the words that hail
                Thy sorrow with no sorrowing words
                Or gratulate thy grief with song
                Less bitter than the winds that wrong
                Thy withering woodlands, where the birds
                Keep hardly heart to sing or see
                How fair thy faint wan face may be.
            
            
            
                December
                December, thou whose hallowing hands
                On shuddering seas and hardening lands
                Set as a sacramental sign
                The seal of Christmas felt on earth
                As witness toward a new year's birth
                Whose promise makes thy death divine,
                The crowning joy that comes of thee
                Makes glad all grief on land or sea.
            
        
    