
						
        
        	
            
            
                
                    Diræ
                
            
        	
            
                
                    Guai a voi, anime prave.
                    Dante.
                
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            Soyez maudits, d'abord d'être ce que vous êtes,
                            Et puis soyez maudits d'obséder les poëtes!
                        
                    
                    Victor Hugo.
                
            
        
        
        	
        		
        
        	
            I
            A Dead King
            [Ferdinand II. entered Malebolge May 22nd, 1859.]
            
            Go down to hell. This end is good to see;
            
            The breath is lightened and the sense at ease
            Because thou art not; sense nor breath there is
            In what thy body was, whose soul shall be
            Chief nerve of hell's pained heart eternally.
            Thou art abolished from the midst of these
            That are what thou wast: Pius from his knees
            Blows off the dust that flecked them, bowed for thee.
            Yea, now the long-tongued slack-lipped litanies
            Fail, and the priest has no more prayer to sell—
            Now the last Jesuit found about thee is
            The beast that made thy fouler flesh his cell—
            Time lays his finger on thee, saying, Cease;
            Here is no room for thee; go down to hell.
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            II
            A Year After
            If blood throbs yet in this that was thy face,
                
                O thou whose soul was full of devil's faith,
                If in thy flesh the worm's bite slackeneth
                In some acute red pause of iron days,
                Arise now, gird thee, get thee on thy ways,
                Breathe off the worm that crawls and fears not breath;
                King, it may be thou shalt prevail on death;
                King, it may be thy soul shall find out grace.
                O spirit that hast eased the place of Cain,
                Weep now and howl, yea weep now sore; for this
                That was thy kingdom hath spat out its king.
                Wilt thou plead now with God? behold again,
                Thy prayer for thy son's sake is turned to a hiss,
                Thy mouth to a snake's whose slime outlives the sting.
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            III
            Peter's Pence from Perugia
            Iscariot, thou grey-grown beast of blood,
            Stand forth to plead; stand, while red drops run here
            And there down fingers shaken with foul fear,
            Down the sick shivering chin that stooped and sued,
            Bowed to the bosom, for a little food
            At Herod's hand, who smites thee cheek and ear.
            Cry out, Iscariot; haply he will hear;
            Cry, till he turn again to do thee good.
            Gather thy gold up, Judas, all thy gold,
            And buy thee death; no Christ is here to sell,
            But the dead earth of poor men bought and sold,
            While year heaps year above thee safe in hell,
            To grime thy grey dishonourable head
            With dusty shame, when thou art damned and dead.
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
            IV
            Papal Allocution
            
                Popule mi, quid tibi feci?
            
            
            What hast thou done? Hark, till thine ears wax hot,
            Judas; for these and these things hast thou done.
            Thou hast made earth faint, and sickened the sweet sun,
            With fume of blood that reeks from limbs that rot;
            Thou hast washed thine hands and mouth, saying, Am I not
            Clean? and thy lips were bloody, and there was none
            To speak for man against thee, no, not one;
            This hast thou done to us, Iscariot.
            Therefore, though thou be deaf and heaven be dumb,
            A cry shall be from under to proclaim
            In the ears of all who shed men's blood or sell
            Pius the Ninth, Judas the Second, come
            Where Boniface out of the filth and flame
            	Barks for his advent in the clefts of hell.                    
            
        	1 Dante, Inferno, xix. 53.
        	
        
    
        	
        		
        
            
        	
            The Burden of Austria
            1866
            
            
                O daughter of pride, wasted with misery,
                With all the glory that thy shame put on
                Stripped off thy shame, O daughter of Babylon,
                Yea, whoso be it, yea, happy shall he be
                That as thou hast served us hath rewarded thee.
                Blessed, who throweth against war's boundary stone
                Thy warrior brood, and breaketh bone by bone
                Misrule thy son, thy daughter Tyranny.
                That landmark shalt thou not remove for shame,
                But sitting down there in a widow's weed
                Wail; for what fruit is now of thy red fame?
                Have thy sons too and daughters learnt indeed
                What thing it is to weep, what thing to bleed?
                Is it not thou that now art but a name?
            
                    1 A geographical expression.—Metternich of Italy.
                    
        
    
        	
        		
        
            
        	
            VI
            Locusta
            
            
                Come close and see her and hearken. This is she.
                
                Stop the ways fast against the stench that nips
                Your nostril as it nears her. Lo, the lips
                That between prayer and prayer find time to be
                Poisonous, the hands holding a cup and key,
                Key of deep hell, cup whence blood reeks and drips;
                The loose lewd limbs, the reeling hingeless hips,
                The scurf that is not skin but leprosy.
                This haggard harlot grey of face and green
                With the old hand's cunning mixes her new priest
                The cup she mixed her Nero, stirred and spiced.
                She lisps of Mary and Jesus Nazarene
                With a tongue tuned, and head that bends to the east,
                Praying. There are who say she is bride of Christ.
            
        

    
        	
        		
        
            
        	
            VII
            Celæno
            
            
                The blind king hides his weeping eyeless head,
                Sick with the helpless hate and shame and awe,
                Till food have choked the glutted hell-bird's craw
                And the foul cropful creature lie as dead
                And soil itself with sleep and too much bread:
                So the man's life serves under the beast's law,
                And things whose spirit lives in mouth and maw
                Share shrieking the soul's board and soil her bed,
                Till man's blind spirit, their sick slave, resign
                Its kingdom to the priests whose souls are swine,
                And the scourged serf lie reddening from their rod,
                Discrowned, disrobed, dismantled, with lost eyes
                Seeking where lurks in what conjectural skies
                That triple-headed hound of hell their God.
            
        

    
        	
        		
        
            
        	
            VIII
            A Choice
            
                Faith is the spirit that makes man's body and blood
                
                Sacred, to crown when life and death have ceased
                His heavenward head for high fame's holy feast;
                But as one swordstroke swift as wizard's rod
                Made Cæsar carrion and made Brutus God,
                Faith false or true, born patriot or born priest,
                Smites into semblance or of man or beast
                The soul that feeds on clean or unclean food.
                Lo here the faith that lives on its own light,
                Visible music; and lo there, the foul
                Shape without shape, the harpy throat and howl.
                Sword of the spirit of man! arise and smite,
                And sheer through throat and claw and maw and tongue
                Kill the beast faith that lives on its own dung.
            
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            IX
            The Augurs
            
            
                Lay the corpse out on the altar; bid the elect
                
                Slaves clear the ways of service spiritual,
                Sweep clean the stalled soul's serviceable stall,
                Ere the chief priest's dismantling hands detect
                The ulcerous flesh of faith all scaled and specked
                Beneath the bandages that hid it all,
                And with sharp edgetools œcumenical
                The leprous carcases of creeds dissect.
                As on the night ere Brutus grew divine
                The sick-souled augurs found their ox or swine
                Heartless; so now too by their after art
                In the same Rome, at an uncleaner shrine,
                Limb from rank limb, and putrid part from part,
                They carve the corpse—a beast without a heart.
            
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            X
            A Counsel
            O strong Republic of the nobler years
                
                Whose white feet shine beside time's fairer flood
                That shall flow on the clearer for our blood
                Now shed, and the less brackish for our tears;
                When time and truth have put out hopes and fears
                With certitude, and love has burst the bud,
                If these whose powers then down the wind shall scud
                Still live to feel thee smite their eyes and ears,
                When thy foot's tread hath crushed their crowns and creeds,
                Care thou not then to crush the beast that bleeds,
                The snake whose belly cleaveth to the sod,
                Nor set thine heel on men as on their deeds;
                But let the worm Napoleon crawl untrod,
                Nor grant Mastai the gallows of his God.
                
                    1869.
                

            
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XI
            The Moderates
            
                Virtutem videant intabescantque relictâ
            
            
            She stood before her traitors bound and bare,
            
            Clothed with her wounds and with her naked shame
            As with a weed of fiery tears and flame,
            Their mother-land, their common weal and care,
            And they turned from her and denied, and sware
            They did not know this woman nor her name.
            And they took truce with tyrants and grew tame,
            And gathered up cast crowns and creeds to wear,
            And rags and shards regilded. Then she took
            In her bruised hands their broken pledge, and eyed
            These men so late so loud upon her side
            With one inevitable and tearless look,
            That they might see her face whom they forsook;
            And they beheld what they had left, and died.
            
                February 1870.
            
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XII
            Intercession
            
                Ave Cæsar Imperator, moriturum te saluto.
            
            
                I
                O Death, a little more, and then the worm;
                A little longer, O Death, a little yet,
                Before the grave gape and the grave-worm fret;
                Before the sanguine-spotted hand infirm
                Be rottenness, and that foul brain, the germ
                Of all ill things and thoughts, be stopped and set;
                A little while, O Death, ere he forget,
                A small space more of life, a little term;
                A little longer ere he and thou be met,
                Ere in that hand that fed thee to thy mind
                The poison-cup of life be overset;
                A little respite of disastrous breath,
                Till the soul lift up her lost eyes, and find
                Nor God nor help nor hope, but thee, O Death.
            
        	
            
                II
                Shall a man die before his dying day,
                Death? and for him though the utter day be nigh,
                Not yet, not yet we give him leave to die;
                We give him grace not yet that men should say
                He is dead, wiped out, perished and past away.
                Till the last bitterness of life go by,
                Thou shalt not slay him; till those last dregs run dry,
                O thou last lord of life! thou shalt not slay.
                Let the lips live a little while and lie,
                The hand a little, and falter, and fail of strength,
                And the soul shudder and sicken at the sky;
                Yea, let him live, though God nor man would let
                Save for the curse' sake; then at bitter length,
                Lord, will we yield him to thee, but not yet.
            
        	
            
                III
                Hath he not deeds to do and days to see
                Yet ere the day that is to see him dead?
                Beats there no brain yet in the poisonous head,
                Throbs there no treason? if no such thing there be,
                If no such thought, surely this is not he.
                Look to the hands then; are the hands not red?
                What are the shadows about this man's bed?
                Death, was not this the cupbearer to thee?
                Nay, let him live then, till in this life's stead
                Even he shall pray for that thou hast to give;
                Till seeing his hopes and not his memories fled
                Even he shall cry upon thee a bitter cry,
                That life is worse than death; then let him live,
                Till death seem worse than life; then let him die.
            
        	
            
                IV
                O watcher at the guardless gate of kings,
                O doorkeeper that serving at their feast
                Hast in thine hand their doomsday drink, and seest
                With eyeless sight the soul of unseen things;
                Thou in whose ear the dumb time coming sings,
                Death, priest and king that makest of king and priest
                A name, a dream, a less thing than the least,
                Hover awhile above him with closed wings,
                Till the coiled soul, an evil snake-shaped beast,
                Eat its base bodily lair of flesh away;
                If haply, or ever its cursed life have ceased,
                Or ever thy cold hands cover his head
                From sight of France and freedom and broad day,
                He may see these and wither and be dead.
            
            
                Paris: September 1869.
            
        

    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XIII
            The Saviour of Society
            
                I
            O son of man, but of what man who knows?
            That broughtest healing on thy leathern wings
            To priests, and under them didst gather kings,
            And madest friends to thee of all man's foes;
            Before thine incarnation, the tale goes,
            Thy virgin mother, pure of sensual stings,
            Communed by night with angels of chaste things,
            And, full of grace, untimely felt the throes
            Of motherhood upon her, and believed
            The obscure annunciation made when late
            A raven-feathered raven-throated dove
            Croaked salutation to the mother of love
            Whose misconception was immaculate,
            And when her time was come she misconceived.
            
        	
            
                II
                Thine incarnation was upon this wise,
                Saviour; and out of east and west were led
                To thy foul cradle by thy planet red
                Shepherds of souls that feed their sheep with lies
                Till the utter soul die as the body dies,
                And the wise men that ask but to be fed
                Though the hot shambles be their board and bed
                And sleep on any dunghill shut their eyes,
                So they lie warm and fatten in the mire:
                And the high priest enthroned yet in thy name,
                Judas, baptised thee with men's blood for hire;
                And now thou hangest nailed to thine own shame
                In sight of all time, but while heaven has flame
                Shalt find no resurrection from hell-fire.
            
            
                December 1869.
            
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XIV
            Mentana: Second Anniversary
            
                
                    
                    	
			                Est-ce qu'il n'est pas temps que la foudre se prouve,
        			        Cieux profonds, en broyant ce chien, fils de la louve?
                    	
                    
                
                    La Légende des Siècles:—Ratbert.
                
                
            
            
                I
                By the dead body of Hope, the spotless lamb
                Thou threwest into the high priest's slaughtering-room,
                And by the child Despair born red therefrom
                As, thank the secret sire picked out to cram
                With spurious spawn thy misconceiving dam,
                Thou, like a worm from a town's common tomb,
                Didst creep from forth the kennel of her womb,
                Born to break down with catapult and ram
                Man's builded towers of promise, and with breath
                And tongue to track and hunt his hopes to death:
                O, by that sweet dead body abused and slain,
                And by that child mismothered,—dog, by all
                Thy curses thou hast cursed mankind withal,
                With what curse shall man curse thee back again?
            
        	
            
                II
                By the brute soul that made man's soul its food;
                By time grown poisonous with it; by the hate
                And horror of all souls not miscreate;
                By the hour of power that evil hath on good;
                And by the incognizable fatherhood
                Which made a whorish womb the shameful gate
                That opening let out loose to fawn on fate
                A hound half-blooded ravening for man's blood;
                (What prayer but this for thee should any say,
                Thou dog of hell, but this that Shakespeare said?)
                By night deflowered and desecrated day,
                That fall as one curse on one cursed head,
                Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I pray,
                That I may live to say, The dog is dead!
            
            
                1869.
            
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
        	XV
            Mentana: Third Anniversary
            
                I
                Such prayers last year were put up for thy sake;
                What shall this year do that hath lived to see
                The piteous and unpitied end of thee?
                What moan, what cry, what clamour shall it make,
                Seeing as a reed breaks all thine empire break,
                And all thy great strength as a rotten tree,
                Whose branches made broad night from sea to sea,
                And the world shuddered when a leaf would shake?
                From the unknown deep wherein those prayers were heard,
                From the dark height of time there sounds a word,
                Crying, Comfort; though death ride on this red hour,
                Hope waits with eyes that make the morning dim,
                Till liberty, reclothed with love and power,
                Shall pass and know not if she tread on him.
            
        	
            
                II
                The hour for which men hungered and had thirst,
                And dying were loth to die before it came,
                Is it indeed upon thee? and the lame
                Late foot of vengeance on thy trace accurst
                For years insepulchred and crimes inhearsed,
                For days marked red or black with blood or shame,
                Hath it outrun thee to tread out thy name?
                This scourge, this hour, is this indeed the worst?
                O clothed and crowned with curses, canst thou tell?
                Have thy dead whispered to thee what they see
                Whose eyes are open in the dark on thee
                Ere spotted soul and body take farewell
                Or what of life beyond the worm's may be
                Satiate the immitigable hours in hell?
            
            
                1870.
            
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XVI
            The Descent into Hell
            January 9th, 1873
            
                I
                O night and death, to whom we grudged him then,
                When in man's sight he stood not yet undone,
                Your king, your priest, your saviour, and your son,
                We grudge not now, who know that not again
                Shall this curse come upon the sins of men,
                Nor this face look upon the living sun
                That shall behold not so abhorred an one
                In all the days whereof his eye takes ken.
                The bond is cancelled, and the prayer is heard
                That seemed so long but weak and wasted breath;
                Take him, for he is yours, O night and death.
                Hell yawns on him whose life was as a word
                Uttered by death in hate of heaven and light,
                A curse now dumb upon the lips of night.
            
        	
            
                II
                What shapes are these and shadows without end
                That fill the night full as a storm of rain
                With myriads of dead men and women slain,
                Old with young, child with mother, friend with friend,
                That on the deep mid wintering air impend,
                Pale yet with mortal wrath and human pain,
                Who died that this man dead now too might reign,
                Toward whom their hands point and their faces bend?
                The ruining flood would redden earth and air
                If for each soul whose guiltless blood was shed
                There fell but one drop on this one man's head
                Whose soul to-night stands bodiless and bare,
                For whom our hearts give thanks who put up prayer,
                That we have lived to say, The dog is dead.
            
        
    
        	
        		
        
        	
            XVII
            Apologia
            If wrath embitter the sweet mouth of song,
            And make the sunlight fire before those eye
            That would drink draughts of peace from the unsoiled skies,
            The wrongdoing is not ours, but ours the wrong,
            Who hear too loud on earth and see too long
            The grief that dies not with the groan that dies,
            Till the strong bitterness of pity cries
            Within us, that our anger should be strong.
            For chill is known by heat and heat by chill,
            And the desire that hope makes love to still
            By the fear flying beside it or above,
            A falcon fledged to follow a fledgeling dove,
            And by the fume and flame of hate of ill
            The exuberant light and burning bloom of love.
        
    
        
    