
					    
				            
        

            
            Threnody
            
                
                Watching here alone by the fire whereat last year
                
                Sat with me the friend that a week since yet was near,
                That a week has borne so far and hid so deep,
                Woe am I that I may not weep,
                May not yearn to behold him here.
            
            
                Shame were mine, and little the love I bore him were,
                Now to mourn that better he fares than love may fare
                Which desires, and would not have indeed, its will,
                Would not love him so worse than ill,
                Would not clothe him again with care.
            
            
                Yet can love not choose but remember, hearts but ache,
                Eyes but darken, only for one vain thought's poor sake,
                For the thought that by this hearth's now lonely side
                Two fast friends, on the day he died,
                Looked once more for his hand to take.
            
            
            
                Let thy soul forgive them, and pardon heal the sin,
                Though their hearts be heavy to think what then had been,
                The delight that never while they live may be—
                Love's communion of speech with thee.
                Soul and speech with the soul therein.
            
            
                O my friend, O brother, a glory veiled and marred!
                Never love made moan for a life more evil-starred.
                Was it envy, chance, or chance-compelling fate,
                Whence thy spirit was bruised so late,
                Bowed so heavily, bound so hard?
            
            
                Now released, it may be,—if only love might know—
                Filled and fired with sight, it beholds us blind and low
                With a pity keener yet, if that may be,
                Even than ever was this that we
                Felt, when love of thee wrought us woe.
            
            
                None may tell the depths and the heights of life and death.
                What we may we give thee: a word that sorrow saith,
                And that none will heed save sorrow: scarce a song.
                All we may, who have loved thee long,
                Take: the best we can give is breath.
            
        

    