
					    
				            
				               	
				                
				                    
				                
				                	
				                	
				                
        
            
            A Midsummer Holiday
            To Theodore Watts
            
            
                
            IThe Seaboard
             
                The sea is at ebb, and the sound of her utmost word
                Is soft as the least wave's lapse in a still small reach.
                From bay into bay, on quest of a goal deferred,
                From headland ever to headland and breach to breach
                Where earth gives ear to the message that all days preach
                With changes of gladness and sadness that cheer and chide,
                The lone way lures me along by a chance untried
                That haply, if hope dissolve not and faith be whole,
                Not all for nought shall I seek, with a dream for guide,
                The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.
            
            
                The trackless ways are untravelled of sail or bird;
                The hoar wave hardly recedes from the soundless beach.
                The silence of instant noon goes nigh to be heard,
                The viewless void to be visible: all and each,
                A closure of calm no clamour of storm can breach
                Concludes and confines and absorbs them on either side,
                All forces of light and of life and the live world's pride.
                
                Sands hardly ruffled of ripples that hardly roll
                Seem ever to show as in reach of a swift brief stride
                The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.
            
            
                The waves are a joy to the seamew, the meads to the herd,
                And a joy to the heart is a goal that it may not reach.
                No sense that for ever the limits of sense engird,
                No hearing or sight that is vassal to form or speech,
                Learns ever the secret that shadow and silence teach,
                Hears ever the notes that or ever they swell subside,
                Sees ever the light that lights not the loud world's tide,
                Clasps ever the cause of the lifelong scheme's control
                Wherethrough we pursue, till the waters of life be dried,
                The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.
            
            
                Friend, what have we sought or seek we, whate'er betide,
                Though the seaboard shift its mark from afar descried,
                But aims whence ever anew shall arise the soul?
                Love, thought, song, life, but show for a glimpse and hide
                The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.
            
            
                  
                      
            IIA Haven
            
                East and north a waste of waters, south and west 
                Lonelier lands than dreams in sleep would feign to be,
                When the soul goes forth on travel, and is prest
                Round and compassed in with clouds that flash and flee.
                Dells without a streamlet, downs without a tree,
                Cirques of hollow cliff that crumble, give, their guest
                Little hope, till hard at hand he pause, to see
                Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.
            
            Many a lone long mile, by many a headland's crest,
                Down by many a garden dear to bird and bee,
                Up by many a sea-down's bare and breezy breast,
                Winds the sandy strait of road where flowers run free.
                Here along the deep steep lanes by field and lea
                Knights have carolled, pilgrims chanted, on their quest,
                Haply, ere a roof rose toward the bleak strand's lee,
                Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.
            
                
            
                Are the wild lands cursed perchance of time, or blest,
                Sad with fear or glad with comfort of the sea?
                Are the ruinous towers of churches fallen on rest
                Watched of wanderers woful now, glad once as we,
                When the night has all men's eyes and hearts in fee,
                When the soul bows down dethroned and dispossest?
                Yet must peace keep guard, by day's and night's decree,
                Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.
            
            
                Friend, the lonely land is bright for you and me
                All its wild ways through: but this methinks is best,
                Here to watch how kindly time and change agree
                Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.
            
            
            
            
                
            IIIOn A Country Road
            
                Along these low pleached lanes, on such a day,
                So soft a day as this, through shade and sun,
                With glad grave eyes that scanned the glad wild way,
                And heart still hovering o'er a song begun,
                And smile that warmed the world with benison,
                Our father, lord long since of lordly rhyme,
                Long since hath haply ridden, when the lime
                Bloomed broad above him, flowering where he came.
                Because thy passage once made warm this clime,
                Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.
            
            
                Each year that England clothes herself with May,
                She takes thy likeness on her. Time hath spun
                Fresh raiment all in vain and strange array
                For earth and man's new spirit, fain to shun
                Things past for dreams of better to be won,
                Through many a century since thy funeral chime
                Rang, and men deemed it death's most direful crime
                To have spared not thee for very love or shame;
                And yet, while mists round last year's memories climb,
                Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.
            
                
            
                Each turn of the old wild road whereon we stray,
                Meseems, might bring us face to face with one
                Whom seeing we could not but give thanks, and pray
                For England's love our father and her son
                To speak with us as once in days long done
                With all men, sage and churl and monk and mime,
                Who knew not as we know the soul sublime
                That sang for song's love more than lust of fame.
                Yet, though this be not, yet, in happy time,
                Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.
            
            
                Friend, even as bees about the flowering thyme,
                Years crowd on years, till hoar decay begrime
                Names once beloved; but, seeing the sun the same,
                As birds of autumn fain to praise the prime,
                Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.
            
            
            
            
                
            IVThe Mill Garden
            
                Stately stand the sunflowers, glowing down the garden-side, 
                Ranged in royal rank arow along the warm grey wall,
                Whence their deep disks burn at rich midnoon afire with pride,
                Even as though their beams indeed were sunbeams, and the tall
                Sceptral stems bore stars whose reign endures, not flowers that fall.
                Lowlier laughs and basks the kindlier flower of homelier fame,
                Held by love the sweeter that it blooms in Shakespeare's name,
                Fragrant yet as though his hand had touched and made it thrill,
                Like the whole world's heart, with warm new life and gladdening flame.
                Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!
            
            
                Softlier here the flower-soft feet of refluent seasons glide,
                Lightlier breathes the long low note of change's gentler call.
                
                Wind and storm and landslip feed the lone sea's gulf outside,
                Half a seamew's first flight hence; but scarce may these appal
                Peace, whose perfect seal is set for signet here on all.
                Steep and deep and sterile, under fields no plough can tame,
                Dip the cliffs full-fledged with poppies red as love or shame,
                Wide wan daisies bleak and bold, or herbage harsh and chill;
                Here the full clove pinks and wallflowers crown the love they claim.
                Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!
            
            
                All the place breathes low, but not for fear lest ill betide,
                Soft as roses answering roses, or a dove's recall.
                Little heeds it how the seaward banks may stoop and slide,
                How the winds and years may hold all outer things in thrall,
                How their wrath may work on hoar church tower and boundary wall.
                Far and wide the waste and ravin of their rule proclaim
                Change alone the changeless lord of things, alone the same:
                Here a flower is stronger than the winds that work their will,
                Or the years that wing their way through darkness toward their aim.
                Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!
            
                
            
                Friend, the home that smiled us welcome hither when we came,
                When we pass again with summer, surely should reclaim
                Somewhat given of heart's thanksgiving more than words fulfil—
                More than song, were song more sweet than all but love, might frame.
                Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!
            
            
            
                
            VA SEA-MARK
            
                Rains have left the sea-banks ill to climb:
                Waveward sinks the loosening seaboard's floor:
                Half the sliding cliffs are mire and slime.
                Earth, a fruit rain-rotted to the core,
                Drops dissolving down in flakes, that pour
                Dense as gouts from eaves grown foul with grime.
                One sole rock which years that scathe not score
                Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.
            
            
                Time were even as even the rainiest clime,
                Life were even as even this lapsing shore,
                Might not aught outlive their trustless prime:
                Vainly fear would wail or hope implore,
                Vainly grief revile or love adore
                Seasons clothed in sunshine, rain, or rime.
                Now for me one comfort held in store
                Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.
            
            
                Once, by fate's default or chance's crime,
                Each apart, our burdens each we bore;
                Heard, in monotones like bells that chime,
                Chime the sounds of sorrows, float and soar
                
                Joy's full carols, near or far before;
                Heard not yet across the alternate rhyme
                Time's tongue tell what sign set fast of yore
                Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.
            
            
                Friend, the sign we knew not heretofore
                Towers in sight here present and sublime.
                Faith in faith established evermore
                Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.
            
            
            
                
            VITHE CLIFFSIDE PATH
            
                Seaward goes the sun, and homeward by the down 
                We, before the night upon his grave be sealed.
                Low behind us lies the bright steep murmuring town,
                High before us heaves the steep rough silent field.
                Breach by ghastlier breach, the cliffs collapsing yield:
                Half the path is broken, half the banks divide;
                Flawed and crumbled, riven and rent, they cleave and slide
                Toward the ridged and wrinkled waste of girdling sand
                Deep beneath, whose furrows tell how far and wide
                Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.
            
            
                Star by star on the unsunned waters twiring down.
                Golden spear-points glance against a silver shield.
                Over banks and bents, across the headland's crown,
                As by pulse of gradual plumes through twilight wheeled,
                Soft as sleep, the waking wind awakes the weald.
                Moor and copse and fallow, near or far descried,
                Feel the mild wings move, and gladden where they glide:
                
                Silence, uttering love that all things understand,
                Bids the quiet fields forget that hard beside
                Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.
            
            
                Yet may sight, ere all the hoar soft shade grow brown,
                Hardly reckon half the rifts and rents unhealed
                Where the scarred cliffs downward sundering drive and drown,
                Hewn as if with stroke of swords in tempest steeled,
                Wielded as the night's will and the wind's may wield.
                Crowned and zoned in vain with flowers of autumntide,
                Soon the blasts shall break them, soon the waters hide;
                Soon, where late we stood, shall no man ever stand.
                Life and love seek harbourage on the landward side:
                Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.
            
            
                Friend, though man be less than these, for all his pride,
                Yet, for all his weakness, shall not hope abide?
                Wind and change can wreck but life and waste but land:
                Truth and trust are sure, though here till all subside
                Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.
            
            
            
                
            VIIIN THE WATER
            
                The sea is awake, and the sound of the song of the joy of her waking is rolled
                From afar to the star that recedes, from anear to the wastes of the wild wide shore.
                Her call is a trumpet compelling us homeward: if dawn in her east be acold,
                From the sea shall we crave not her grace to rekindle the life that it kindled before,
                Her breath to requicken, her bosom to rock us, her kisses to bless as of yore?
                For the wind, with his wings half open, at pause in the sky, neither fettered nor free,
                Leans waveward and flutters the ripple to laughter: and fain would the twain of us be
                Where lightly the wave yearns forward from under the curve of the deep dawn's dome,
                And, full of the morning and fired with the pride of the glory thereof and the glee,
                Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids and beseeches, athirst for the foam.
            
            
                Life holds not an hour that is better to live in: the past is a tale that is told,
                The future a sun-flecked shadow, alive and asleep, with a blessing in store.
                
                As we give us again to the waters, the rapture of limbs that the waters enfold
                Is less than the rapture of spirit whereby, though the burden it quits were sore,
                Our souls and the bodies they wield at their will are absorbed in the life they adore—
                In the life that endures no burden, and bows not the forehead, and bends not the knee—
                In the life everlasting of earth and of heaven, in the laws that atone and agree,
                In the measureless music of things, in the fervour of forces that rest or that roam,
                That cross and return and reissue, as I after you and as you after me
                Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids and beseeches, athirst for the foam.
            
            
                For, albeit he were less than the least of them, haply the heart of a man may be bold
                To rejoice in the word of the sea as a mother's that saith to the son she bore,
                Child, was not the life in thee mine, and my spirit the breath in thy lips from of old?
                Have I let not thy weakness exult in my strength, and thy foolishness learn of my lore?
                Have I helped not or healed not thine anguish, or made not the might of thy gladness more?
                And surely his heart should answer, The light of the love of my life is in thee.
                She is fairer than earth, and the sun is not fairer, the wind is not blither than she:
                From my youth hath she shown me the joy of her bays that I crossed, of her cliffs that I clomb,
                
                Till now that the twain of us here, in desire of the dawn and in trust of the sea,
                Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids and beseeches, athirst for the foam.
            
            
                Friend, earth is a harbour of refuge for winter, a covert whereunder to flee
                When day is the vassal of night, and the strength of the hosts of her mightier than he;
                But here is the presence adored of me, here my desire is at rest and at home.
                There are cliffs to be climbed upon land, there are ways to be trodden and ridden: but we
                Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids and beseeches, athirst for the foam.
            
            
            
                
            VIIITHE SUNBOWS
            
                Spray of song that springs in April, light of love that laughs through May,
                Live and die and live for ever: nought of all things far less fair
                Keeps a surer life than these that seem to pass like fire away.
                In the souls they live which are but all the brighter that they were;
                In the hearts that kindle, thinking what delight of old was there.
                Wind that shapes and lifts and shifts them bids perpetual memory play
                Over dreams and in and out of deeds and thoughts which seem to wear
                Light that leaps and runs and revels through the springing flames of spray.
            
            
                Dawn is wild upon the waters where we drink of dawn to-day:
                Wide, from wave to wave rekindling in rebound through radiant air,
                Flash the fires unwoven and woven again of wind that works in play,
                Working wonders more than heart may note or sight may wellnigh dare,
                
                Wefts of rarer light than colours rain from heaven, though this be rare.
                Arch on arch unbuilt in building, reared and ruined ray by ray,
                Breaks and brightens, laughs and lessens, even till eyes may hardly bear
                Light that leaps and runs and revels through the springing flames of spray.
            
            
                Year on year sheds light and music rolled and flashed from bay to bay
                Round the summer capes of time and winter headlands keen and bare
                Whence the soul keeps watch, and bids her vassal memory watch and pray,
                If perchance the dawn may quicken, or perchance the midnight spare.
                Silence quells not music, darkness takes not sunlight in her snare;
                Shall not joys endure that perish? Yea, saith dawn, though night say nay:
                Life on life goes out, but very life enkindles everywhere
                Light that leaps and runs and revels through the springing flames of spray.
            
            
                Friend, were life no more than this is, well would yet the living fare.
                All aflower and all afire and all flung heavenward, who shall say
                Such a flash of life were worthless? This is worth a world of care—
                Light that leaps and runs and revels through the springing flames of spray.
            
            
            
                
            IXON THE VERGE
            
                Here begins the sea that ends not till the world's end. Where we stand,
                Could we know the next high sea-mark set beyond these waves that gleam,
                We should know what never man hath known, nor eye of man hath scanned.
                Nought beyond these coiling clouds that melt like fume of shrines that steam
                Breaks or stays the strength of waters till they pass our bounds of dream.
                Where the waste Land's End leans westward, all the seas it watches roll
                Find their border fixed beyond them, and a worldwide shore's control:
                These whereby we stand no shore beyond us limits: these are free.
                Gazing hence, we see the water that grows iron round the Pole,
                From the shore that hath no shore beyond it set in all the sea.
            
            
                Sail on sail along the sea-line fades and flashes; here on land
                Flash and fade the wheeling wings on wings of mews that plunge and scream.
                
                Hour on hour along the line of life and time's evasive strand
                Shines and darkens, wanes and waxes, slays and dies: and scarce they seem
                More than motes that thronged and trembled in the brief noon's breath and beam.
                Some with crying and wailing, some with notes like sound of bells that toll,
                Some with sighing and laughing, some with words that blessed and made us whole,
                Passed, and left us, and we know not what they were, nor what were we.
                Would we know, being mortal? Never breath of answering whisper stole
                From the shore that hath no shore beyond it set in all the sea.
            
            
                Shadows, would we question darkness? Ere our eyes and brows be fanned
                Round with airs of twilight, washed with dews from sleep's eternal stream,
                Would we know sleep's guarded secret? Ere the fire consume the brand,
                Would it know if yet its ashes may requicken? yet we deem
                Surely man may know, or ever night unyoke her starry team,
                What the dawn shall be, or if the dawn shall be not: yea, the scroll
                Would we read of sleep's dark scripture, pledge of peace or doom of dole.
                Ah, but here man's heart leaps, yearning toward the gloom with venturous glee,
                
                Though his pilot eye behold nor bay nor harbour, rock nor shoal,
                From the shore that hath no shore beyond it set in all the sea.
            
            
                Friend, who knows if death indeed have life or life have death for goal?
                Day nor night can tell us, nor may seas declare nor skies unroll
                What has been from everlasting, or if aught shall alway be.
                Silence answering only strikes response reverberate on the soul
                From the shore that hath no shore beyond it set in all the sea.
            
            
        
				        