
					    
				        
        
            
            
            At a Month's End
            
                The night last night was strange and shaken:
                More strange the change of you and me.
                Once more, for the old love's love forsaken,
                We went out once more toward the sea.
            
            
                For the old love's love-sake dead and buried,
                One last time, one more and no more,
                We watched the waves set in, the serried
                Spears of the tide storming the shore.
            
            
                Hardly we saw the high moon hanging,
                Heard hardly through the windy night
                Far waters ringing, low reefs clanging,
                Under wan skies and waste white light.
            
            
                With chafe and change of surges chiming,
                The clashing channels rocked and rang
                Large music, wave to wild wave timing,
                And all the choral water sang.
            
            
                Faint lights fell this way, that way floated,
                Quick sparks of sea-fire keen like eyes
                From the rolled surf that flashed, and noted
                Shores and faint cliffs and bays and skies.
            
            
            
                The ghost of sea that shrank up sighing
                At the sand's edge, a short sad breath
                Trembling to touch the goal, and dying
                With weak heart heaved up once in death—
            
            
                The rustling sand and shingle shaken
                With light sweet touches and small sound—
                These could not move us, could not waken
                Hearts to look forth, eyes to look round.
            
            
                Silent we went an hour together,
                Under grey skies by waters white.
                Our hearts were full of windy weather,
                Clouds and blown stars and broken light.
            
            
                Full of cold clouds and moonbeams drifted
                And streaming storms and straying fires,
                Our souls in us were stirred and shifted
                By doubts and dreams and foiled desires.
            
            
                Across, aslant, a scudding sea-mew
                Swam, dipped, and dropped, and grazed the sea:
                And one with me I could not dream you;
                And one with you I could not be.
            
            
                As the white wing the white wave's fringes
                Touched and slid over and flashed past—
                As a pale cloud a pale flame tinges
                From the moon's lowest light and last—
            
            
                As a star feels the sun and falters,
                Touched to death by diviner eyes—
                As on the old gods' untended altars
                The old fire of withered worship dies—
            
            
            
                (Once only, once the shrine relighted
                Sees the last fiery shadow shine,
                Last shadow of flame and faith benighted,
                Sees falter and flutter and fail the shrine)
            
            
                So once with fiery breath and flying
                Your winged heart touched mine and went,
                And the swift spirits kissed, and sighing,
                Sundered and smiled and were content.
            
            
                That only touch, that feeling only,
                Enough we found, we found too much;
                For the unlit shrine is hardly lonely
                As one the old fire forgets to touch.
            
            
                Slight as the sea's sight of the sea-mew,
                Slight as the sun's sight of the star:
                Enough to show one must not deem you
                For love's sake other than you are.
            
            
                Who snares and tames with fear and danger
                A bright beast of a fiery kin,
                Only to mar, only to change her
                Sleek supple soul and splendid skin?
            
            
                Easy with blows to mar and maim her,
                Easy with bonds to bind and bruise;
                What profit, if she yield her tamer
                The limbs to mar, the soul to lose?
            
            
                Best leave or take the perfect creature,
                Take all she is or leave complete;
                Transmute you will not form or feature,
                Change feet for wings or wings for feet.
            
            
            
                Strange eyes, new limbs, can no man give her;
                Sweet is the sweet thing as it is.
                No soul she hath, we see, to outlive her;
                Hath she for that no lips to kiss?
            
            
                So may one read his weird, and reason,
                And with vain drugs assuage no pain.
                For each man in his loving season
                Fools and is fooled of these in vain.
            
            
                Charms that allay not any longing,
                Spells that appease not any grief,
                Time brings us all by handfuls, wronging
                All hurts with nothing of relief.
            
            
                Ah, too soon shot, the fool's bolt misses!
                What help? the world is full of loves;
                Night after night of running kisses,
                Chirp after chirp of changing doves.
            
            
                Should Love disown or disesteem you
                For loving one man more or less?
                You could not tame your light white sea-mew,
                Nor I my sleek black pantheress.
            
            
                For a new soul let whoso please pray,
                We are what life made us, and shall be.
                For you the jungle and me the sea-spray,
                And south for you and north for me.
            
            
                But this one broken foam-white feather
                I throw you off the hither wing,
                Splashed stiff with sea-scurf and salt weather,
                This song for sleep to learn and sing—
            
            
            
                Sing in your ear when, daytime over,
                You, couched at long length on hot sand
                With some sleek sun-discoloured lover,
                Wince from his breath as from a brand:
            
            
                Till the acrid hour aches out and ceases,
                And the sheathed eyeball sleepier swims,
                The deep flank smoothes its dimpling creases,
                And passion loosens all the limbs:
            
            
                Till dreams of sharp grey north-sea weather
                Fall faint upon your fiery sleep,
                As on strange sands a strayed bird's feather
                The wind may choose to lose or keep.
            
            
                But I, who leave my queen of panthers,
                As a tired honey-heavy bee
                Gilt with sweet dust from gold-grained anthers
                Leaves the rose-chalice, what for me?
            
            
                From the ardours of the chaliced centre,
                From the amorous anthers' golden grime,
                That scorch and smutch all wings that enter,
                I fly forth hot from honey-time.
            
            
                But as to a bee's gilt thighs and winglets
                The flower-dust with the flower-smell clings;
                As a snake's mobile rampant ringlets
                Leave the sand marked with print of rings;
             
            
                So to my soul in surer fashion
                Your savage stamp and savour hangs;
                The print and perfume of old passion,
                The wild-beast mark of panther's fangs.
            
        

    