
					    
				        
        
            
            
            Relics
            
                This flower that smells of honey and the sea,
                White laurustine, seems in my hand to be
                A white star made of memory long ago
                Lit in the heaven of dear times dead to me.
            
            
                A star out of the skies love used to know
                Here held in hand, a stray left yet to show
                What flowers my heart was full of in the days
                That are long since gone down dead memory's flow.
            
            
                Dead memory that revives on doubtful ways,
                Half hearkening what the buried season says
                Out of the world of the unapparent dead
                Where the lost Aprils are, and the lost Mays.
            
            
                Flower, once I knew thy star-white brethren bred
                Nigh where the last of all the land made head
                Against the sea, a keen-faced promontory,
                Flowers on salt wind and sprinkled sea-dews fed.
            
            
                Their hearts were glad of the free place's glory;
                The wind that sang them all his stormy story
                Had talked all winter to the sleepless spray,
                And as the sea's their hues were hard and hoary.
            
            
            
                Like things born of the sea and the bright day,
                They laughed out at the years that could not slay,
                Live sons and joyous of unquiet hours,
                And stronger than all storms that range for prey.
            
            
                And in the close indomitable flowers
                A keen-edged odour of the sun and showers
                Was as the smell of the fresh honeycomb
                Made sweet for mouths of none but paramours.
            
            
                Out of the hard green wall of leaves that clomb
                They showed like windfalls of the snow-soft foam,
                Or feathers from the weary south-wind's wing,
                Fair as the spray that it came shoreward from.
            
            
                And thou, as white, what word hast thou to bring?
                If my heart hearken, whereof wilt thou sing?
                For some sign surely thou too hast to bear,
                Some word far south was taught thee of the spring.
            
            
                White like a white rose, not like these that were
                Taught of the wind's mouth and the winter air,
                Poor tender thing of soft Italian bloom,
                Where once thou grewest, what else for me grew there?
            
            
                Born in what spring and on what city's tomb,
                By whose hand wast thou reached, and plucked for whom?
                There hangs about thee, could the soul's sense tell,
                An odour as of love and of love's doom.
            
            
            
                Of days more sweet than thou wast sweet to smell,
                Of flower-soft thoughts that came to flower and fell,
                Of loves that lived a lily's life and died,
                Of dreams now dwelling where dead roses dwell.
            
            
                O white birth of the golden mountain-side
                That for the sun's love makes its bosom wide
                At sunrise, and with all its woods and flowers
                Takes in the morning to its heart of pride!
            
            
                Thou hast a word of that one land of ours,
                And of the fair town called of the Fair Towers,
                A word for me of my San Gimignan,
                A word of April's greenest-girdled hours.
            
            
                Of the old breached walls whereon the wallflowers ran
                Called of Saint Fina, breachless now of man,
                Though time with soft feet break them stone by stone,
                Who breaks down hour by hour his own reign's span.
            
            
                Of the old cliff overcome and overgrown
                That all that flowerage clothed as flesh clothes bone,
                That garment of acacias made for May,
                Whereof here lies one witness overblown.
            
            
                The fair brave trees with all their flowers at play,
                How king-like they stood up into the day!
                How sweet the day was with them, and the night!
                Such words of message have dead flowers to say.
            
            
                This that the winter and the wind made bright,
                And this that lived upon Italian light,
                Before I throw them and these words away,
                Who knows but I what memories too take flight?
            
        

    