
					    
				        
        
            
            Memorial Verses
            on the Death of Théophile Gautier
            
                Death, what hast thou to do with me? So saith
                Love, with eyes set against the face of Death;
                What have I done, O thou strong Death, to thee,
                That mine own lips should wither from thy breath?
            
            
                Though thou be blind as fire or as the sea,
                Why should thy waves and storms make war on me?
                Is it for hate thou hast to find me fair,
                Or for desire to kiss, if it might be,
            
            
                My very mouth of song, and kill me there?
                So with keen rains vexing his crownless hair,
                With bright feet bruised from no delightful way,
                Through darkness and the disenchanted air,
            
            
                Lost Love went weeping half a winter's day.
                And the armèd wind that smote him seemed to say,
                How shall the dew live when the dawn is fled,
                Or wherefore should the Mayflower outlast May?
            
            
                Then Death took Love by the right hand and said,
                Smiling: Come now and look upon thy dead.
                But Love cast down the glories of his eyes,
                And bowed down like a flower his flowerless head.
            
            
            
                And Death spake, saying: What ails thee in such wise,
                Being god, to shut thy sight up from the skies?
                If thou canst see not, hast thou ears to hear?
                Or is thy soul too as a leaf that dies?
            
            
                Even as he spake with fleshless lips of fear,
                But soft as sleep sings in a tired man's ear,
                Behold, the winter was not, and its might
                Fell, and fruits broke forth of the barren year.
            
            
                And upon earth was largess of great light,
                And moving music winged for worldwide flight,
                And shapes and sounds of gods beheld and heard,
                And day's foot set upon the neck of night.
            
            
                And with such song the hollow ways were stirred
                As of a god's heart hidden in a bird,
                Or as the whole soul of the sun in spring
                Should find full utterance in one flower-soft word,
            
            
                And all the season should break forth and sing
                From one flower's lips, in one rose triumphing;
                Such breath and light of song as of a flame
                Made ears and spirits of them that heard it ring.
            
            
                And Love beholding knew not for the same
                The shape that led him, nor in face nor name,
                For he was bright and great of thews and fair,
                And in Love's eyes he was not Death, but Fame.
            
            
                Not that grey ghost whose life is empty and bare
                And his limbs moulded out of mortal air,
                A cloud of change that shifts into a shower
                And dies and leaves no light for time to wear:
            
            
            
                But a god clothed with his own joy and power,
                A god re-risen out of his mortal hour
                Immortal, king and lord of time and space,
                With eyes that look on them as from a tower.
            
            
                And where he stood the pale sepulchral place
                Bloomed, as new life might in a bloodless face,
                And where men sorrowing came to seek a tomb
                With funeral flowers and tears for grief and grace,
            
            
                They saw with light as of a world in bloom
                The portal of the House of Fame illume
                The ways of life wherein we toiling tread,
                And watched the darkness as a brand consume.
            
            
                And through the gates where rule the deathless dead
                The sound of a new singer's soul was shed
                That sang among his kinsfolk, and a beam
                Shot from the star on a new ruler's head.
            
            
                A new star lighting the Lethean stream,
                A new song mixed into the song supreme
                Made of all souls of singers and their might,
                That makes of life and time and death a dream.
            
            
                Thy star, thy song, O soul that in our sight
                Wast as a sun that made for man's delight
                Flowers and all fruits in season, being so near
                The sun-god's face, our god that gives us light.
            
            
                To him of all gods that we love or fear
                Thou amongst all men by thy name wast dear,
                Dear to the god that gives us spirit of song
                To bind and burn all hearts of men that hear.
            
            
            
                The god that makes men's words too sweet and strong
                For life or time or death to do them wrong,
                Who sealed with his thy spirit for a sign
                And filled it with his breath thy whole life long.
            
            
                Who made thy moist lips fiery with new wine
                Pressed from the grapes of song, the sovereign vine,
                And with all love of all things loveliest
                Gave thy soul power to make them more divine.
            
            
                That thou might'st breathe upon the breathless rest
                Of marble, till the brows and lips and breast
                Felt fall from off them as a cancelled curse
                That speechless sleep wherewith they lived opprest.
            
            
                Who gave thee strength and heat of spirit to pierce
                All clouds of form and colour that disperse,
                And leave the spirit of beauty to remould
                In types of clean chryselephantine verse.
            
            
                Who gave thee words more golden than fine gold
                To carve in shapes more glorious than of old,
                And build thy songs up in the sight of time
                As statues set in godhead manifold:
            
            
                In sight and scorn of temporal change and clime
                That meet the sun re-risen with refluent rhyme
                —As god to god might answer face to face—
                From lips whereon the morning strikes sublime.
            
            
                Dear to the god, our god who gave thee place
                Among the chosen of days, the royal race,
                The lords of light, whose eyes of old and ears
                Saw even on earth and heard him for a space.
            
            
            
                There are the souls of those once mortal years
                That wrought with fire of joy and light of tears
                In words divine as deeds that grew thereof
                Such music as he swoons with love who hears.
            
            
                There are the lives that lighten from above
                Our under lives, the spheral souls that move
                Through the ancient heaven of song-illumined air
                Whence we that hear them singing die with love.
            
            
                There all the crowned Hellenic heads, and there
                The old gods who made men godlike as they were,
                The lyric lips wherefrom all songs take fire,
                Live eyes, and light of Apollonian hair.
            
            
                There, round the sovereign passion of that lyre
                Which the stars hear and tremble with desire,
                The ninefold light Pierian is made one
                That here we see divided, and aspire,
            
            
                Seeing, after this or that crown to be won;
                But where they hear the singing of the sun,
                All form, all sound, all colour, and all thought
                Are as one body and soul in unison.
            
            
                There the song sung shines as a picture wrought,
                The painted mouths sing that on earth say nought,
                The carven limbs have sense of blood and growth
                And large-eyed life that seeks nor lacks not aught.
            
            
                There all the music of thy living mouth
                Lives, and all loves wrought of thine hand in youth
                And bound about the breasts and brows with gold
                And coloured pale or dusk from north or south.
            
            
            
                Fair living things made to thy will of old,
                Born of thy lips, no births of mortal mould,
                That in the world of song about thee wait
                Where thought and truth are one and manifold.
            
            
                Within the graven lintels of the gate
                That here divides our vision and our fate,
                The dreams we walk in and the truths of sleep,
                All sense and spirit have life inseparate.
            
            
                There what one thinks, is his to grasp and keep;
                There are no dreams, but very joys to reap,
                No foiled desires that die before delight,
                No fears to see across our joys and weep.
            
            
                There hast thou all thy will of thought and sight,
                All hope for harvest, and all heaven for flight;
                The sunrise of whose golden-mouthed glad head
                To paler songless ghosts was heat and light.
            
            
                Here where the sunset of our year is red
                Men think of thee as of the summer dead,
                Gone forth before the snows, before thy day,
                With unshod feet, with brows unchapleted.
            
            
                Couldst thou not wait till age had wound, they say,
                Round those wreathed brows his soft white blossoms? Nay,
                Why shouldst thou vex thy soul with this harsh air,
                Thy bright-winged soul, once free to take its way?
            
            
                Nor for men's reverence hadst thou need to wear
                The holy flower of grey time-hallowed hair;
                Nor were it fit that aught of thee grew old,
                Fair lover all thy days of all things fair.
            
            
            
                And hear we not thy words of molten gold
                Singing? or is their light and heat acold
                Whereat men warmed their spirits? Nay, for all
                These yet are with us, ours to hear and hold.
            
            
                The lovely laughter, the clear tears, the call
                Of love to love on ways where shadows fall,
                Through doors of dim division and disguise,
                And music made of doubts unmusical;
            
            
                The love that caught strange light from death's own eyes,
                And filled death's lips with fiery words and sighs,
                And half asleep let feed from veins of his
                Her close red warm snake's mouth, Egyptian-wise:
            
            
                And that great night of love more strange than this,
                When she that made the whole world's bale and bliss
                Made king of all the world's desire a slave,
                And killed him in mid kingdom with a kiss;
            
            
                Veiled loves that shifted shapes and shafts, and gave,
                Laughing, strange gifts to hands that durst not crave,
                Flowers double-blossomed, fruits of scent and hue
                Sweet as the bride-bed, stranger than the grave;
            
            
                All joys and wonders of old lives and new
                That ever in love's shine or shadow grew,
                And all the grief whereof he dreams and grieves,
                And all sweet roots fed on his light and dew;
            
                
                    1La
                        Morte Amoureuse. 2Une
                            Nuit de Cléopâtre. 3Mademoiselle de Maupin.
                
            
            
                All these through thee our spirit of sense perceives,
                As threads in the unseen woof thy music weaves,
                Birds caught and snared that fill our ears with thee,
                Bay-blossoms in thy wreath of brow-bound leaves.
            
            
                Mixed with the masque of death's old comedy
                Though thou too pass, have here our flowers, that we
                For all the flowers thou gav'st upon thee shed,
                And pass not crownless to Persephone.
            
            
                Blue lotus-blooms and white and rosy-red
                We wind with poppies for thy silent head,
                And on this margin of the sundering sea
                Leave thy sweet light to rise upon the dead.
            
        
        
        

    