
					    
				            
        
            
            Vos Deos Laudamus:
            The Conservative Journalist's Anthem
            As a matter of fact, no man living, or who ever lived—not Cæsar or  Pericles, not  Shakespeare or  Michael Angelo— could confer honour more than he took on entering the House of Lords.— Saturday Review, December 15, 1883.
            Clumsy and shallow snobbery—can do no hurt.—Ibid.
            
            
                I
                O Lords our Gods, beneficent, sublime,
                In the evening, and before the morning flames,
                We praise, we bless, we magnify your names.
                The slave is he that serves not; his the crime
                And shame, who hails not as the crown of Time
                That House wherein the all-envious world acclaims
                Such glory that the reflex of it shames
                All crowns bestowed of men for prose or rhyme.
                The serf, the cur, the sycophant is he
                Who feels no cringing motion twitch his knee
                When from a height too high for Shakespeare nods
                The wearer of a higher than Milton's crown.
                Stoop, Chaucer, stoop: Keats, Shelley, Burns, bow down:
                These have no part with you, O Lords our Gods.
            
            
            
                II
                O Lords our Gods, it is not that ye sit
                Serene above the thunder, and exempt
                From strife of tongues and casualties that tempt
                Men merely found by proof of manhood fit
                For service of their fellows: this is it
                Which sets you past the reach of Time's attempt,
                Which gives us right of justified contempt
                For commonwealths built up by mere men's wit:
                That gold unlocks not, nor may flatteries ope,
                The portals of your heaven; that none may hope
                With you to watch how life beneath you plods,
                Save for high service given, high duty done;
                That never was your rank ignobly won:
                For this we give you praise, O Lords our Gods.
            
            
                III
                O Lords our Gods, the times are evil: you
                Redeem the time, because of evil days.
                While abject souls in servitude of praise
                Bow down to heads untitled, and the crew
                Whose honour dwells but in the deeds they do,
                From loftier hearts your nobler servants raise
                More manful salutation: yours are bays
                That not the dawn's plebeian pearls bedew;
                Yours, laurels plucked not of such hands as wove
                Old age its chaplet in Colonos' grove.
                Our time, with heaven and with itself at odds,
                Makes all lands else as seas that seethe and boil;
                But yours are yet the corn and wine and oil,
                And yours our worship yet, O Lords our Gods.
            
            December 15, 1883.
        
    