
					    
				        
        
            
            
            The White Czar
            
                
                [In an English magazine of 1877 there appeared a version of some insolent lines
                addressed by A Russian Poet to the Empress of India. To these the first of the two
                following sonnets was designed to serve by way of counterblast. The writer will scarcely
                be suspected of royalism or imperialism; but it seemed to him that an insult levelled by
                Muscovite lips at the ruler of England might perhaps be less unfitly than unofficially
                resented by an Englishman who was also a republican.]
            
            
                I
                Gehazi by the hue that chills thy cheek
                And Pilate by the hue that sears thine hand
                Whence all earth's waters cannot wash the brand
                That signs thy soul a manslayer's though thou speak
                All Christ, with lips most murderous and most meek—
                Thou set thy foot where England's used to stand!
                Thou reach thy rod forth over Indian land!
                Slave of the slaves that call thee lord, and weak
                As their foul tongues who praise thee! son of them
                Whose presence put the snows and stars to shame
                In centuries dead and damned that reek below
                Curse-consecrated, crowned with crime and flame,
                To them that bare thee like them shalt thou go
                Forth of man's life—a leper white as snow.
            
            
            
                II
                Call for clear water, wash thine hands, be clean,
                Cry, What is truth? O Pilate; thou shalt know
                Haply too soon, and gnash thy teeth for woe
                Ere the outer darkness take thee round unseen
                That hides the red ghosts of thy race obscene
                Bound nine times round with hell's most dolorous flow,
                And in its pools thy crownless head lie low
                By his of Spain who dared an English queen
                With half a world to hearten him for fight,
                Till the wind gave his warriors and their might
                To shipwreck and the corpse-encumbered sea.
                But thou, take heed, ere yet thy lips wax white,
                Lest as it was with Philip so it be,
                O white of name and red of hand, with thee.
            
        
    